according to the article below:
Describe and explain which stages of the social information processing model the victims have difficulty with...


Interpretation of Cues
The second step of the SIP model concerns the interpretation of
cues in a social situation. People interpret the intent of other
individuals (intent attributions) and the reasons why particular
events have occurred (causal attributions). In addition, according to Crick and Dodge (1994), people engage in other interpretative processes, that is, evaluations of goal attainment, past
performance, self, and others. In the next paragraphs, we will
discuss findings about (1) hostile attributions, (2) causal attributions, (3) general evaluations, and (4) additional types of
interpretation. For an overview, see Table 3.
Intent attributions. Fourteen of the included studies have
addressed associations between intent attributions and victimization. The studies examined intent attributions by questions
about intentions of another person in a hypothetical story
(e.g., Berlin, Appleyard, & Dodge, 2011; Calvete & Orue,
2011; Camodeca & Goossens, 2005). In general, the studies
support that victims have more hostile attributions (e.g.,
Pornari & Wood, 2010; Prinstein, Cheah, & Gyer, 2005; Yeung
& Leadbeater, 2007). Peer victimization (predominantly at
school) was most often examined, but the relationship between
intent attributions and victimization was also found for victimization at home and in the neighborhood. The two longitudinal
studies about intent attributions suggest that the direction of the
association between hostile attributions is bidirectional: hostile
attributions predict victimization (Calvete & Orue, 2011) and
victimization predicts hostile attributions (Perren, Ettekal, &
Ladd, 2013).
It seems that associations between intent attributions and
victimization are weaker the more time has passed since being
victimized, as no association was found between intent attributions and childhood abuse among adults (Berlin et al., 2011).
Possibly, intent attributions change in time due to other experiences, which leads to less association with previous victimization. In addition, associations seem weaker among victims of
mild, rather than severe, violence (Shahinfar, Kupersmidt, &
Matza, 2001), suggesting that mild forms of violence have less
impact (change intent attributions less) than severe violence.
Causal attributions. Studies about causal attributions especially
focus on the perceived locus of control. This is the belief that
a certain situation is under the subject’s own (internal) control,
or under outside (external) control, such as luck or powerful
others (Crick & Dodge, 1994). Causal attributions are often
measured by general scales (e.g., Catterson & Hunter, 2010;
Christiansen & Evans, 2005).
Seven cross-sectional studies have addressed the external
locus of control. The results suggest that victims are generally
under the impression that a situation is less under their control,
that is, the victims have a higher external locus of control (e.g.,
Christiansen & Evans, 2005; Fredstrom, Adams, & Gilman,
2011). The locus of control may have changed over time, since
associations seem weaker the more time has elapsed since
being victimized, as no association was found between external
locus of control and child abuse (Mannarino & Cohen, 1996).
The relation between internal locus of control and victimization was addressed in seven studies. Two of them focus on
internal locus of control in general. Victims of rape were found
to have a lower internal locus of control (Miller, Monson, &
Norton, 1995). One study about child abuse did not find a relation between internal locus of control and experiencing victimization but did find that child abuse on multiple occasions, as
opposed to one occasion, was related to a diminished internal
locus of control (Bolstad & Zinbarg, 1997), suggesting that victimization with a higher impact may result in lower perceived
internal control.
Although victims have a higher external locus of control and
seem to have a lower internal locus of control in general, they
have a more internal locus of control in negative situations, for
example, self-blame (e.g., Prinstein et al., 2005). Longitudinal
studies suggest that this association is bidirectional: an internal
locus of control in a negative situation predicts victimization
(Shelley & Craig, 2010) and victimization predicts an internal
locus of control in a negative situation (Gibb & Abela, 2008).

Evaluations. Studies about evaluations focus on evaluations or
perceptions of self or others and are often measured by general
scales (e.g., Bowling et al., 2010; Cole, Maxwell, Dukewich, &
Yosik, 2010). Thirteen studies have addressed the relationship
between evaluations of self or others and victimization. All but
one of these studies support the idea that victims have more
Table 3. (continued)
Source Design Sample
Type and Measurement of
Victimization
Type and Measurement of Interpretation of Cues
Found Relation
Victims Have ...
Linder, Crick, and
Collins (2002)
Cross-sectional N ¼ 104 (70 female)
undergraduate and
graduate students. M ¼
20.6 (2.7) years, Range
18–30
Relational
victimization,
self-report
Evaluations, selfreport
Less trust (r ¼ –.42,
p < .001)
Neary and Joseph
(1994)
Cross-sectional N ¼ 60 (60 female)
students. M ¼ 11 years,
Range 10–12
Peer
victimization,
peer report
Evaluations, selfreport
More negative selfevaluations (t ¼ –1.73,
p < .05)
Reid-Quinones et al.
(2011)
Cross-sectional N ¼ 263 (134 female)
students in Grade 5 or
8. M ¼ 12.06 (1.61)
years
Physical
victimization
(by peers or
others), selfreport
Evaluations, selfreport
More negative selfevaluations (6.21 vs. 5.54,
p < .05)
Rudolph, TroopGordon, and
Flynn (2009)
Cross-sectional N ¼ 206 (110) female)
children. M ¼ 10.13
(1.16) years, Range
7.75–13.50
Peer
victimization
(relational),
self-report
Evaluations, selfreport
More negative evaluations
with others (r ¼ .22,
p < .01)
Salmivalli and Isaacs
(2005)
Longitudinal N ¼ 212 (105 female)
students in Grades 5
and 6. Range 11–13
years
Peer
victimization,
peer report
Evaluations, selfreport
Negative self-evaluations
(b ¼ –.08, p < .05) but
not evaluations of others
positively predict victimization 4 months later.
Victimization predicts
negative evaluations of
others (b ¼ –.10, p < .10)
but not self-evaluations 8
months later
Taylor, Sullivan, and
Kliewer (2013)
Cross-sectional N ¼ 326 (175 female)
students in Grade 5
and 8. M ¼ 12.1 (1.6)
years, Range 10–16.
Peer
victimization,
self-report
Evaluations, selfreport
More negative selfevaluations (r ¼ .22,
p < .001)
Troop-Gordon and
Ladd (2005)
Longitudinal N ¼ 399 (193 female)
children, M ¼ 5.52,
9.63 and 11.71 years
(three waves)
Peer victimization
(physical,
verbal and
general), peer
report
Evaluations, selfreport
Victimization predicts
negative cognitions.
Negative self-evaluations
but not evaluations of
others, predict changes in
victimization (time span of
2 years)
Interpretation of cues: Other interpretations
Elwood et al. (2007) Cross-sectional N ¼ 81 (81 female)
undergraduate
psychology students.
M ¼ 19.57 (1.17) years
Sexual
victimization,
self-report
Other
interpretations,
self-report based
on hypothetical
stories
More predictability (t ¼
2.43, p < .05) and higher
perceived escalation of
threat (t ¼ 2.02, p < .05)
Soler-Baillo, Marx,
and Sloan (2005)
Cross-sectional N ¼ 97 (97 female)
undergraduate
students. M ¼ 19.55
(2.76) years
Sexual
victimization,
self-report
Other
interpretations,
Heart rate
activity
Slower in identifying risk;
F(4.12), p < .001
Yeater, Treat, Viken,
and McFall (2010)
Cross-sectional N ¼ 194 undergraduate
psychology students.
M ¼ 19.52 (1.39) years
Sexual
victimization,
self-report
Other
interpretations,
Explicit
classification task
Attribute less risk (d ¼ –.43,
p < .01)
Note. ns ¼ not statistically significant.
van Reemst et al. 11
negative general evaluations (e.g., Cole et al., 2010; Taylor,
Sullivan, & Kliewer, 2013). This is most often studied for victims of peer victimization but was also found among other
types of victimization such as workplace victimization and sexual victimization (e.g., Bowling et al., 2010). Longitudinal
studies show that negative self-evaluations, but not evaluations
of others, predict victimization (e.g., Bowling et al., 2010),
whereas victimization predicts negative evaluations of others
but not negative self-evaluations (Salmivalli & Isaacs, 2005).
Other interpretation aspects. Cross-sectional studies about victims addressed aspects of interpretation that were not already
included in the SIP model. Victims have a different subjective
estimate of risk, according to three studies among females. Victims attributed more unpleasantness toward threatening situations but were also slower in identifying risk (Soler-Baillo,
Marx, & Sloan, 2005). Victims attributed less risk to situations
in hypothetical dating situations or when socially interacting
with men (Yeater, Treat, Viken, & McFall, 2010), but victims
perceived threatening social situations to be more predictable
and more quickly increasing in risk (Elwood, Williams, Olatunji, & Lohr, 2007). A possible explanation is that being
slower in identifying risk may cause delay in an appropriate
reaction, which puts an individual at risk of victimization. This
may result in considering a situation as less risky in general and
more quickly increasing in risk at a later moment, when in fact,
risk was already present. In the other direction, victims may
consider risky situations to be more ‘‘normal’’ because they
have been in a risk situation before and therefore attribute less
risk and more predictability to the situation. However, more
research is needed on these types of interpretations, among
both men and female, as only few studies were available.
Conclusion on the interpretation of cues. Most studies offer support for the link between interpretation and victimization. Victims are more likely to display hostile attributions and external
locus of control in general, more internal locus of control in
negative situations, and more negative evaluations of self and
others. Longitudinal studies suggest that the associations
between victimization and hostile attributions of intent and
internal locus of control in negative situations are bidirectional.
In addition, negative self-evaluations predict victimization,
whereas victimization predicts negative evaluations of others.
Also, the subjective estimate of risk seems related to victimization, which was not yet part of the SIP model.
Clarification of Goals
The third step of the model is the clarification of goals. Goals are
orientations toward producing particular outcomes (Crick &
Dodge, 1994). Six cross-sectional studies have addressed the
association between goals and victimization. These studies measure people’s goals in various ways, such as asking about goals
in a hypothetical situation (e.g., Camodeca & Goossens, 2005;
Rudolph, Troop-Gordon, & Flynn, 2009) or having psychologists code the goals of people reexperiencing a situation (ReidQuinones et al., 2011). Research on the clarification of goals
among victims addressed (1) hostile social goals, (2) goals of
wanting to be liked, (3) avoidance goals, and (4) an additional
goal, the goal of self-protection. However, the different types
of goals have only been addressed in few studies all of which are
about peer victimization. For an overview, see Table 4.
Hostile social goals. According to studies about hostile social
goals, victims have more revenge goals (Camodeca & Goossens,
2005; Reid-Quinones et al., 2011) and victims of severe victimization have more general hostile social goals (including revenge,
dominance, avoidance, and affiliation; Shahinfar et al., 2001),
but no differences were found for goals of dominance in another
study (Sijtsema, Veenstra, Lindenberg, & Salmivalli, 2009).
Wanting to be liked. Studies about goals related to wanting to be
liked found that victims have more goals of wanting to impress
(Rudolph et al., 2009) and less goals of developing relationships (Rudolph, 2010) than nonvictims. The importance of
wanting to have a nice time together and feel less angry was not
associated with victimization (Camodeca & Goossens, 2005).
Avoidance goals. No association was found between having goals
of avoidance (e.g., desire not to experience tension or victimization) and victimization (Reid-Quinones et al., 2011). The desire to
endure a situation with the least amount of loss, that is, selfprotection goals, was however less present in victims than in people who witnessed victimization (Reid-Quinones et al., 2011).
Conclusions about the clarification of goals. On the whole, research
on goals has focused on a range of goals, with varying conclusions. Studies suggest that victims may regard revenge goals
and impressing goals as more important, while relationship
development goals are perceived as less important. No difference is observed in other goals, such as wanting to have a nice
time together, feeling less angry, or avoidance goals. In addition, victims may think pursuing the goal of self-protection is
less important. However, more research is necessary to confirm
these findings also among other types of victimization.
Response Generation
The fourth step of the SIP model, response generation, refers to
the repertoire of responses people hold for a specific situation.
This may refer to the number, type, and the order of responses
that people access. This step is hardly studied in relation to victimization. Only the type of responses that victims access was
assessed in one cross-sectional study (Warden & Mackinnon,
2003). In this survey, children were asked to provide a number
of possible solutions (what could you do ... ?) in a hypothetical problem situation, which were coded as aggressive, passive,
or assertive. It was found that victims did not differ in generating these types of solutions to problem situations (Warden &
Mackinnon, 2003). For more information about this study, see
Table 5. Thus, no support was found for the idea that response
generation was related to victimization.

self-efficacy and (2) self-efficacy for communication. These
types of self-efficacy are not response related as are the studies
about evaluations described earlier as part of the interpretation
of cues step of the SIP model. They may affect the outcome of
situations, as they seem to be strongly related to self-esteem
(e.g., Judge, Erez, Bono, & Thoresen, 2002), which influences
outcomes according to the SIP model (Crick & Dodge, 1994).
General self-efficacy is an individual’s general confidence
in one’s coping ability. According to studies, victims have
lower general self-efficacy (Bender, Ferguson, Thompson,
Komlo, & Pollio, 2010; Fredstrom et al., 2011; Walsh &
Foshee, 1998). However, no association was found between
general self-efficacy and victimization among older participant
groups (Comijs, Jonker, Van Tilburg, & Smit, 1999; Mikkelsen
& Einarsen, 2002), possibly because they have more fixed patterns of SIP.
Findings about self-efficacy for communication seem
dependent on the type of communication. More specifically,
victims of sexual victimization had lower self-efficacy for
communication about sexuality (including refusing sex and
contraception; Hovsepian, Blais, Manseau, Otis, & Girard,
2010). No associations were found between victimization and
self-efficacy for persuasive communication (i.e., propose a
game; Camodeca & Goossens, 2005) or between nonsexual
types of dating victimization and self-efficacy for communication about sexuality (Hovsepian et al., 2010). An association
between self-efficacy and victimization was thus only found
when the topic of communication was related to the type of victimization the victim experienced. However, more research is
necessary to confirm this idea.
Conclusions about self-efficacy. Generally, studies found that selfefficacy for assertion was lower and self-efficacy for aggression was higher among victims. Additionally, victims had
lower general self-efficacy and lower self-efficacy for communication about topics related to the type of victimization they
experienced. More research is needed to draw conclusions
about other types of self-efficacy. The studies did not offer
insight into the direction of the associations.
Response selection. At the final stage of response decision, a
selection of a response is made. Seven of eight studies have
provided support for the idea that response selection is related
to victimization. These studies addressed (1) aggressive, (2)
assertive, (3) avoidant, and (4) impulsive response selection.
Aggressive response selection. Victims have more aggressive
response selection (Barnett, Barlett, Livengood, Murphy, &
Brewton, 2010; Berlin et al., 2011; Shelley & Craig, 2010).
According to the longitudinal studies reviewed, aggressive
response selection predicted peer victimization (KochenderferLadd, 2004), but victimization in several contexts (e.g., school,
neighborhood and home) did not predict aggressive response
selection, although it was related cross-sectionally (Calvete &
Orue, 2011).
Assertive/prosocial response selection. According to a crosssectional study, victims select less assertive responses ( Garner
& Lemerise, 2007; Yeater & Viken, 2010). In accordance with
a longitudinal study, conflict resolution, but not advice seeking,
even predicts victimization over time (e.g., KochenderferLadd, 2004). There were indications that assertive response
selection was strongly related to more severe forms of victimization (physical versus relational victimization; Garner &
Lemerise, 2007), possibly because severe victimization has
more impact on victims.
Avoidant and impulsive response selection. The relationship
between avoidant response selection and victimization is found
to be more mixed. Kochenderfer-Ladd (2004) found a relation
between the two, whereas Barnett, Barlett, Livengood, Murphy, and Brewton (2010) did not. Another study found variations within the study: more avoidant response selection
was related to victimization among boys but not among girls
(Shelley & Craig, 2010). More research is needed to be
able to explain these differences. According to the only
longitudinal study on this response selection and victimization, avoidant response selection positively predicts victimization (Kochenderfer-Ladd, 2004). Impulsive response
selection was also found to be positively associated with
victimization in a cross-sectional study (Archer et al., 2007).
Conclusions about response selection. Generally, studies suggest
that aggressive and low assertive response selection is related
to victimization. Victims also seem to select more impulsive
responses. In line with longitudinal studies, aggressive, avoidant, and low assertive response selection positively predict
victimization. Victimization did not predict aggressive
response selection. However, due to the few studies available
on the same type of response, more research is necessary to
confirm these findings and to be able to explain inconsistencies
in findings of avoidant response selection.
